                MT-205 
               B.C.A. VI Semester Examination 2015        
                             dot net Technology Paper Time Allowed                       Three Hours Maximum Marks 85.              Pass Marks: 28 

             Note: Attempt all the questions.       
                  Section A 
     objective Type Questions 
Q.1, Choose the correct answer: 
i). Which language is used to create an Asp.net Code file?
 a) Visual Basic
 b) C#
 c) C++
 d) All of the above.

ii) Visual Basic Web Form interface. file fHg What is the Extensian for a Visual basic web form interface file-
 a) .asp 
b) .aspx 
c) .asp.vb
 d) .aspx.vb.

iii) CLR stands for:
 a ) Common Language Runtime 
b) Command Language Runtime r
 c) Common Layer Runtime
 d) Common Layer Rate 

iv)When an Asp.net File is placed,on an IIS server and viewed through a browser, the resulting HTML page contain.
 a) All Asp.net code 
b) As much Asp.net code as is in the Asp.net file
 c) Amix of Asp. net and HTML code
d) all html code.

Q.4. Define the data-binding concept with web in detail. 
                 or
 Connection class command class at Explain connection class and command class.

    Q.5. Describe different web services in detail.
                  or
Explain Web application deployment. 

Q.6. Describe delegates andreflection in C#with examples. 
               or
What are language featude of C#? Define Boxing and unboxing with example.


                   Section C 
    Long Answer Type Questions 

Q.7. What is .Net? Explain parts of .Net framework with diagram. 
                    or 

Explain common language Runtime in..Net architecture. 

Q.8.What is state management? Define different states used in Web services.
 Define the following: 
1)  AdRotator control 
ii) Internet Explorer Control. 

Q.9.  How can we access data using data adapters and data sets? Explain with examples. 
               or
explain the architecture and purpose of ADO.net IN detail.

Q.10. How can we write data settoXML and haw can we read data set with XML? Explain with example. 

             or
 Explain soap and Remote method call using XML. 

Q.11.What is structure of c program? Differentiate c with JAVA. 
                   Or 
How can we serialize and deserialize an object? Give example.
