Designation : EDI Developer
Job Location: Bhopal and Pune
Experience: 5+ year

Skill Required:- 
Resource with 4 to 6 years of experience of working on EDI. 
Experience on EDI Standards- Unedifact, Odette, ANSI X12 , VDA, Map development/support \
Experience on any middleware tool like Sterling Integrator/ WebMethods/ Gentran/ Mendelson/ Inovis TLE/ Seeburger. 
Experience on (VAN) and hands-on on creating partner setups in it. 
Hands on experience of various protocols FTP, SFTP, SMTP, AS/2, Oftp1, Oftp2, ENX, ANX etc. 
Trading partner profile creations, communication setups in middleware tool. 
Should be capable of handling technical calls with partners. 
Knowledge on SAP- IDOCS, QAD- Transformations (optional). 
Troubleshooting EDI and tool related issues 
Basic knowledge on any Domain - order to cash, procurement to pay etc 
Salary: Not Disclosed by Recruiter

Industry:IT-Software / Software Services

Functional Area:IT Software - ERP , CRM

Role Category:Programming & Design

Role:Team Lead/Technical Lead

Employment Type: Permanent Job, Full Time

Desired Candidate Profile
Please refer to the Job description above
Education-

UG: B.Tech/B.E. - Any Specialization, Computers

Company Profile:
Netlink Software Private Limited

Netlink Software Private Limited

Netlink is very proud of its people. We have a staff of hardworking people and individuals of high-integrity who focus on doing the best for the customer every day. We have a highly trained staff of SMEs, processes experts, statistical/mathematical/domain Ph.D.'s, software and network engineers, architects, analysts, programmers, developers and administrators who make an impact on their customers' businesses every day. Each team member of Netlink is focused on providing strong results and building customer driven relationships. They are proud to be "easy to work with".
Based on Netlink's ability to anticipate client needs and to provide the right solutions and people, its growth has been nothing short of phenomenal. Our average annual revenue growth has exceeded 100% since 1999.
To know more about the company, please log on to www.Netlink.com.