        Software Engineering 2013 
   

Note Attempt all question Internal choice is available in cach suction. 
          Section A 
(objective Type Questions) 
Q1 .  Choose the correct answLE- 
(i)Parallul teams are rcquired in: 
(a) RAD model (b) Meta modci (c) Spiral model (d) None of the abovc 
(ii) Software tesling is given by an equation: 
(a) Verification validation 
(b) Verification validation online BU com
 (c) Verification/validation
 (d) None of the above 
(iii) The most important task in a soltwaru projuct is: 
(a) implementation 
(b) Controlling
 (c) Closing
 (d) Planning 
(iv) In Mc Call quality model, product revision quality ractor consist of: 
(a) Maintainability 
(b) Flexibility 
(c) Testability 
(d) None of thc above 
(v) Alpha testing is done by: 
(a) Tesler
 (b) Customer 
(c) Developer 
(d) All of the above 
         Section-B 
(Short Answer Type Questions) 
Q2. What is the basic difference between RAD model and Incremental model? 
        or 
How many types of metrics aru thcrc? Explain in brief?

 Q3 . Briefly describe requirement review and its type 
         or
 What is SRS? Also write its components?

Q IV What is Mc Call's Quality facor?
    or 
inc different levels or CocoMo model? 
Qv. Distinguish between cohesion and coupling?         

                or 
What is verification? Also, write down metrics used for this. 
QVI. Why status accounting is required?
 or 
How many types of system tesuing are there?       
      Section (Long Answer Type Questions) Define Software Engineering? Compare prototype model with
 Q.VIl spiral model of software.
        or 
what is project management? How functionality of a softwaru is calculated? 

Q VIII. Explain process steps of requirement engincuring with a suitable diagram. 
   or
 How information mudeling is donc in a software, explain with an example.
 QIX. What is software quality assurance? Give a comparative analysis of external versus internal qualitics? 
       Or 
management activity? 
Qx. What do you mean by design objectives? Explain various design principles involved in design-engineering of a sofware. 
       or
 What are design classes? How functional indcpcndence can bc achieved in designing a software? 
  Qxl. Describe SCM process steps with a suitable diagram. 
    or 
  Distinguish betwccn: (i) White Box and Black Box uesting, (ii) Integration System testing online BU com