            BCA 6TH sem 
          Examination 2014
               objective 1 
Questions) Choose the correct answer 
(i) The outcome of requirement analysis phase of SDLC is:
 (a) Quality assurance plan 
(b) Dc sign document
 (c) SRS
 (d) Test plan. 
(ii) Which model was given by Dr. Berry Bochan: (a) Water fall model
 (b) Spiral model
 (c) Build fix model
 (d) None of the above 
(iii) SRS document shows:
 (a) "What" of the system
 (b) How to design the system
 (c) Both (a) and (b)
 (d) None of the above
 (iv Which is not a characteristics of a good SRS? 
(a) Correct 
(b) Complete
 (c) Consistent 
(d) Brief Function point method was developed by: 
(a) Beizer 
b) Dr. B. Bochan
 (c) Halstead 
(d) A. albrecht
 (vi) COCOMO stand for: t'
 (a) Initial function point-uniform group
 (b) International function point uniform group (c) International function poin: user group 
(d) Initial function point-user group 
(vi) Which of the following is not a design concept:
 (a) Conesion. 
(b) Coupling 
(c) Modularity
 (d) None of the above
 (viii)Stepwise requirement was proposed by (b) Wirth 
(a) Bocham
 (c Jacobson 
(d)None of the above
 (ix) Software quality is:
 (a) Conformance to requirements
 (b) Fitness for the purpose
 (c) Level of satisfaction 
(d) All of the above 
(x) How many product quality factors have been proposed in MCCell quality model 
(a) 2 (b) 3 (c) 4 (d) 5

Q2.process 
Q3.What is meant "VOU" in software Engineering. 
       or
 What is monotonicity an important
   characteristics of a size or effort matric. Q4. What do you mean by software configuration 
             Or 
Explain the characteristics of SRS.
Q5. Discuss the difference between object oriented and function oriented design. 
           or 
What is impact of cohesion and coupling in software design process.
 Q6. Differentiate between errors fault and failure. 
    or 
What are alpha and beta tesint. Nuellon. 

    C' (Long Answer Type Questions) 

7. Explain various phase of system development life cycle. Givc thu Importance in terms of approximately percentage effort roquired during the phase. 
           Or
 What are the various process models. Briefly explain each of them. 
Q8. What are the advantagcs of using the LOC or the function point metric to measure the size of a software product.
         or 
Discuss about the following:
(i)cocomo (ii)Putnam estimation model

Q9. What is the object of software project planning. Whul aro tho different resourccs required for soluware development. 
                or 
Quality and reliability are related concepts but aru fundamentally different in number of ways. Discuss. 

Q10. Discuss the term data dictionary. Distinguish among structured english, decision table and decision tree while developing the data dictionary. 
       or 
  What is modularity? List the important properties of a modular system.
Q 11 .   What do you mean by quality assurance? Why quality assurance is needed in various stages of development? Explain the various factor that contributes to the quality of a system.
            or 
What is the difference between black boxtesting and white box testing? Give atleast three examples in which black box testing